This symposium has helped us to appreciate even more Jehovah's love for families.
And we appreciate this gift, the Bible, which could serve as a blueprint for families,
to have a loving, warm, safe environment.
And you young ones, you play a vital role in contributing to the joy in your family life.
Your mother, your father, they love you very much.
And they want to have a close, personal, loving relationship with you.
And it's their heartfelt desire that you have a close, personal, loving relationship
with your Heavenly Father, Jehovah.
They want you to be happy now and for the rest of your life, everlasting life.
In the previous talk, we understood how Jehovah wants parents to train their children,
but with what purpose?
Notice what Proverbs chapter 22 and verse 6 gives us instructions for parents.
There in verse 6, it reads, train a boy, or the footnote says, child or youth, in the way
he should go.
Even when he grows old, he will not depart from it.
So what is Jehovah asking of your parents to train you, to train you in such a way that
you will always serve Jehovah from your youth all the way to your adulthood, and really
for the rest of your life?
So Jehovah doesn't spell out every single detail for parents on how they should instruct
you and how they should train you.
That's left up to them.
And so they need to prayerfully think about what would be best for your family and for
you as a child personally.
This means that they will make house rules, sometimes you'll get chores, maybe curfews.
You will get reminders, correction, and discipline.
Why?
Because they love you.
And because they're doing their best to listen and obey Jehovah, and his instructions
are to train you, discipline you, so you can serve Jehovah forever.
It's not an easy assignment.
They need all the help that they can get from Jehovah, as well as from you, especially
when they make rules that you may not like.
What you can and cannot wear.
What you can and cannot listen to or watch.
Or who you pick as close friends.
These are decisions that are left to your parents.
Now will your parents always make the perfect decision, the perfect rule?
No.
Breaking news, it's not news to you that they will make mistakes.
They're imperfect.
But they love you and they're doing the best they can to give you the best training possible.
So you can love Jehovah and serve him forever.
We know that you love and appreciate all that your parents do for you.
But let's be real.
Sometimes you don't understand the reason for the rule.
Or you simply don't agree with it.
What do you do?
Well, you get frustrated.
But that's okay.
We've been there.
We were your age at one time and we completely understand that it could be frustrating.
But we know that this will pass because you'll understand why they're doing this.
It's out of love.
So when you don't see eye to eye, what are you supposed to do?
Well sometimes you need to change your view.
Much has to do with how you view your parents.
How you view your mother and your father will affect how much or how little you respect
them.
Listen to them and obey them.
And here's a question we'd like to pose to you children.
Do you sometimes view your parents as prison guards or lifeguards?
Interesting question.
Prison guards are trained to keep a close watch over prisoners because they don't really
trust them.
They keep them confined with many restrictions.
They tell them what to do and when to do it, when to get up and when to go to sleep.
What they will eat and when they will eat.
But they will wear and all kinds of other rules.
They keep all these restrictions because they don't trust them.
Do you view your parents as prison guards at times?
Well you might, especially if you want more freedom, more independence.
And if it seems like they don't really trust you, they're watching every single move that
you make.
You might feel confined because of all the rules and restrictions.
What about lifeguards?
Well lifeguards also watch people, they watch swimmers, but for a very different reason.
They want to keep them safe.
They want to make sure that they do not swim into danger.
So from their lifeguard tower, they keep a close watch over all the swimmers.
Sometimes they will use their whistle to warn you of danger, to keep away from riptides
or maybe sharks, things that you're not aware of.
Do you view your parents as lifeguards?
We hope so because they are.
It's been said that you could spend years wishing your parents would get off your back
only to realize that they're the only ones who ever really had your back.
Yes, your parents like lifeguards are looking out for your best interest.
They've always had your back and they always will.
They want to make sure that you avoid being drawn into the dangerous currents in this
wicked world, dangers that you may not be aware of.
Do you want to be happier?
Do you want to have more trust from your parents, more freedom, more independence?
If so, you might have to change your view of your parents and don't view them in a negative
way like their prison guards, but view them like lifeguards, safeguarding your life.
Your parents love you very much and their training will pay off if you listen.
And that's what Jehovah is asking you to do.
While your parents are training you, you need to do your part and that is listen.
And that's what our scripture at Proverbs chapter 23 has for an assignment for you.
It's chapter 23 of Proverbs in verse 22.
And there verse 22 says to you children, listen to your father who caused your birth and
do not despise or dislike your mother just because she has grown old.
So although it's not easy at times, what is Jehovah asking of you as your parents are
training you, please listen to them.
But what does it mean to listen?
Listen is more than just hearing words.
It's hearing with a view to obey.
Listening to your mother and your father means giving them your full attention, undivided
attention.
It means turning off your music, taking out your earbuds, putting away your phone and
devoid rolling your eyes when they're speaking to you.
At times you may get frustrated, you may get upset, that's understandable.
We all do.
But how you control your emotions will affect the outcome in the future.
By listening and obeying your parents, you are building a record of trust that will
help you in the future when you need to communicate with them.
Maybe about rules.
Remember, trust is something that you earn.
It's not something that you demand or that's automatic.
What is the best way for you to speak to your parents about rules that you don't understand
or maybe that you don't agree with?
You need to communicate.
Good, open communication.
Communication doesn't mean complaining, shouting, whining, maybe replying with sarcasm.
It means calmly.
Tell your parents how you feel.
Tell them what's on your mind.
The following Bible verse helps if we can apply it.
Proverbs 29-11 says, a stupid person gives vent to all his feelings.
It's out of control, no control.
But the wise one calmly keeps them in check.
In control.
That's what we want to try to follow.
A young woman named Devon tried to do this and this is what she advises.
She says, I found that when I stayed calm and presented my thoughts clearly, I could
counter my parents to listen and either to reason with me on their decision or to come
up with another solution.
Parents appreciate having a real conversation with their children rather than screaming
matches that end up with slamming doors.
Open communication is what's needed.
So you young ones, what have we learned?
We have learned how to view our parents correctly.
Not as a prison guard, but as a life guard who really wants to save your life, you're
everlasting life.
They have your back and they always will.
Listening and obeying strengthens your relationship with your parents as well as your Heavenly
Father Jehovah.
It brings you joy and brings joy to your parents.
And as you apply the training that your parents are giving to you, you will gain wisdom that
will help you now to make wise decisions so that you can have the real life, yes, everlasting
life.
As you watch the concluding video of this symposium, please notice how these children find joy
in their parents.
Man, I'm so happy today because that fire drove interrupted our mattress, but we have
to do it tomorrow.
I'm going to be studying in all night.
Hey, mom, dad, got a shower before our study.
No discussion, no excuses now.
Okay.
Where did all of this come from?
We're going to be here all night.
It did give us time to think.
They are such good examples.
Mom never stops working and our home is always, always beautiful.
They give us so much of their time and themselves.
A bit cheesy sometimes, but overall, they're pretty great.
That night, they didn't lecture us.
They just reminded us of one thing, and it was pretty deep.
When we dedicate our lives to Jehovah, our lives includes everything.
Our time, our resources, our home, our kitchen, yes, our kitchen.
And how we care for those things, it reflects on him and on us as your parents.
That kind of sank in.
I knew I could do better.
No mom, we got this.
We got this?
Oh, yeah, we got this.
Did you notice how the daughters showed respect for their parents?
They did this by listening and obeying their instructions.
What was the key?
It's how they viewed their parents.
They reflected on their parents' fine example in the ministry at home when they would take
the time and have the patience to help them, to listen to them.
And they saw the joy on their mother's face as she kept the home clean and tidy.
What a good example.
They listened to their parents' advice and then they made personal application.
They learned that showing respect into family meant helping out with chores, even when
it meant during the dishes.
This made their parents happy and the daughters happy as well.
In this symposium, we considered how husbands and wives, mothers and fathers and children
can all add and contribute to the success of the joy within the family.
They do this by working together in unity, focusing on the positive things in us.
And having respect for one another.
Yes, each and the family, if they apply Bible principles, use Jehovah's Blueprint.
They know that they can have a successful and happy family.
And most of all, we can make Jehovah happy.
Give him honor as the designer, the architect, and the creator of all families.